---
layout: post
title: "The Fall of Man was Positively Humane: A Naturalist's Interpretation of The Fall"
description: ""
category: 
tags: [comic, bible, blasphemy]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

I made [a geeky comic](/2013/06/15/the-garden/) that trades off the
story of The Garden of Eden and the Fall of Man.  I do not endeavor to
explain that comic here, but it is apparent that the interpretation of
the Fall of Man is colored in such a negative light that I feel I must
present my own positive interpretation.

* * *

The creation story described in Genesis is often used by Biblical
Fundamentalists to dismiss an alternative story of humanity's origins
that has emerged from the sciences.  Fundamentalists insist that a
literal interpretation is the only legitimate interpretation of the
Bible. It's as though they are committed to the idea that, "God can do
all things---except use a metaphor."  Genesis, and The Fall
specifically, is done a disservice by these Fundamentalists because
The Fall has a beautiful interpretation seen through the lens of
science, which speaks well of it. What is a naturalist's
interpretation of Genesis?  It is not a story that details Man's fall
from grace; it is a narrative for Man's ascent from merely animals to
moral animals.

This essay does not imply that the interpretation given here was
intended by the original authors of Genesis.  One might ask, why
consider the interpretation if the authors did not originally intend
it?  Because texts are mirrors in that they often reveal more about
the reader than the original author, and often profitably so.
Consider the Declaration of Independence.  Its meaning is more
beautiful today than when it was written because it had the capacity
to grow beyond the constraints of its time.  Americans read and revere
"all men are created equal" in an inclusive sense, not of applying
exclusively to white males.  It is no injustice that American culture
and language have grown beyond what Thomas Jefferson and the Second
Continental Congress had intended.  It is in this sense of working
with a living document that this essay will treat Genesis.

## Evolution

Genesis begins with God creating the Earth, Heaven, and all life.  On
this score, it's not that bad.

> And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding
> seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed
> is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so. (King James Version,
> Gen. 1.11)

(Animals created.)


Life starts in the water (Gen. 1..  Good.  Plants come first.  Great.  In
general the animals follow a less complex to more complex hierarchy,
which Richard Dawkins characterizes as, complex things come late in
the universe.  Genesis also goes to pains to make it plainly
understood that each animal and plant only produces young of its own
kind.

> (A begats A.)

On this score the Bible has identified two of the three properties
needed for natural selection: 1) Replication "go forth and multiply",
2) Heredity "each producing its own kind", and 3) Selection which
had to wait 6200 or so years for Darwin, give or take a
billion.  


The event that this essay will focus on is foreshadowed by this
passage.  

>"But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not
>eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely
>die" (King James Version, Gen. 2.17).

Of course, Adam and Eve do eat from the Tree of Knowledge.  It is the
consequences of that action that propels this naturalistic
interpretation.  Let us address some cherry-picked consequences in
turn. 

## Child Birth 

God punishes women with difficult child birth.  

> "Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy
> conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children" (Gen. 3.16).

Interpreting this from a biological perspective, the capacity to
acquire knowledge relates to human brain size.  Human brains increased
in size dramatically compared with their closest evolutionary kin,
their skulls increasing in size too.  The most obvious obstacle to
ever increasing brain and skull size for a baby is its mother's
pelvis.  For a quadrupedal animal, this might be an easier burden to
bear, but human pelvises had only recently been shaped for bipedalism,
an awkward arrangement to deliver big-headed babies.  This made child
birth more difficult for women.  Big skulls may account for the
suffering that women undergo during child birth.  Difficult child
birth is a consequence of big-brained babies, and big brains are a
prerequisite for general knowledge.

## Drab Men, Flashy Women

Women are also placed under this constraint, 

>"and thy desire shall be to thy husband" (Gen. 3.16).  

It is with some trepidation I provide an interpretation for this
consequence, for it is the weakest interpretation in this essay.  One
of the interesting things to observe is the bold contrast in the
affairs of humans and animals between the sexes.  For instance, female
animals are often larger and wear drab colors so as not to attract the
attention of predators.  Males often have bright, flashy colors to
attract the attention of females, which inadvertently attracts the
attention of predators too.  In humans, this situation appears to be
exactly opposite.  Women often wear flashy make-up while men often
wear drab colors.  There are some ideas in evolutionary psychology
about why this is the case.

One theory on why this situation may be flipped for humans is because
human child rearing is so difficult that in humans' ancestral
environment a single parent could not raise a child alone (Wright 93).
So there was selective pressure on humans to form pair bonds, and the
material resources that males could provide for their young became a
commodity that child rearing females could not do without.  The
competition for materially-rich mates may have drove human females to
adopt the strategies males in the animal kingdom have been using for
millions of years.  The situation may have swung from what is typical
in the animal kingdom, where females are sexually selective, to a
situation where females are still sexually selective and males are
materially selective.  Women "desiring" a man may be a consequence of
big-brained babies that take considerable resources to raise, which is
ultimately a consequence of acquiring the capacity for knowledge.

## Death

God punishes both man and woman for their disobedience with death.

> "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto
>  the ground; ... for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return"
>  (Gen. 3.19).  

Traditionally, this is interpeted as an entirely bad outcome. However,
consider what death is to an animal of limited faculties.  Without
foresight, does death rightly exist?  Animals die certainly, but what
is to say that death exists from an animal's perspective?  From the
animal's perspective death may not exist at all.  Animals may feel
fear and vigorously avoid things that lead to death, but that does not
mean they comprehend it anymore than they understand that sex leads to
offspring.  They do it because it works; understanding is not
necessary.  Death only becomes appreciable in a creature with
foresight.  If knowledge grants one insights into what the future
holds, then one must come to grips with their own mortality and death.
Death is a necessary consequence of knowledge and foresight, not an
incidental punishment.

## The Fall

The breaking of God's commandment is seen as Man's Fall from Grace.
Traditionally, it has a very negative connotation: Man brought sin
into the world.  Man was cast out of the Garden of Eden, a supposed
heaven on Earth.  Consider it instead as the introduction of morality
into the world---including both sin and virtue.  Prior to that, there
were only animals.  Animals are not moral agents.  Animals kill one
another and even humans, but we do not call them murderers.  Their
actions are amoral.  Genesis introduces an agent that makes a
transition from an amoral world to a moral one.  Prior to eating
from the Tree of Knowledge, Adam and Eve were amoral.  They could not
divine right from wrong, so they could not have rightly understood
disobeying God was wrong.  In that sense their transition from amoral
to moral cannot be wrong---that would mischaracterize the act as a
moral act; it would be like calling a lion a murderer for killing a
gazelle.  Man does not introduce sin alone into the world; Man
introduces morality into the world which includes both sin and virtue.

The Biblical interpretation of the Fall has not let the preceding
point go unnoticed since Eve is blamed more so than Adam.  For if Eve
could not tell right from wrong prior to eating from the Tree of
Knowledge, she could certainly tell afterward.  Thus, by Eve offering
Adam fruit from the Tree of Knowledge, she knowingly abetted Adam's
disobedience of God's commandment.  However, consider again what it
would mean for Eve to leave Adam as an amoral animal.  The Garden of
Eden is not a paradise hidden away from humanity; the amoral animal
kingdom is the ever present Garden of Eden.  One could recreate the
Garden of Eden on any remote island.  One need only release a human
child with no language, no knowledge, no companionship, but plenty of
food---but such an act would be monstrous.  If one happened upon a
child placed in such a condition who grew to be a man, would it not
also be monstrous to leave them there?  Morality forces one to wrestle
with more than just the will to obey; it forces one to discern good
and evil to the best of his or her ability and act accordingly.  

## The Tree of Life

There are two trees named in the Garden of Eden.  Each tree can be
tied directly to a scientific idea.  The Tree of Life is introduced in
Genesis as God dealt with Man's trespass.  

> "And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to
> know good and evil; and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take
> also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever" (Gen. 3.22).

Four and half billion years ago, the Earth was radically altered by
the introduction of something new---a replicator, a gene.  Perhaps it
was a primitive RNA.  That replicator evolved and eventually spawned
all the diversity of life.  Darwin envisioned life as a tree with its
descendants branching away from the root.  Are genes the Tree of Life
from Genesis?  Genes do seem to hold the secrets to life and death.
If one understood genes completely such that he or she could reshape
them, could death be eradicated?  Possibly.  Researchers like Aubrey
de Grey insist this is a viable idea (Hooper 1).  If it is only our
ignorance of genes that prohibits us from picking the fruits of the
Tree of Life, then the staggering complexity of our genes becomes the
protector of the Tree of Life.  

>"So he \[God\] drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the
>garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way,
>to keep the way of the tree of life" (Gen. 3.24).

It is the staggering complexity of genetics that keeps
us from claiming the Tree of Life.

## The Tree of Knowledge

The Tree of Knowledge of good and evil that Adam and Eve ate from also
has its own scientific representative.  With the introduction of
humans on Earth, a new replicator has been released and it too is
producing radical effects---the meme.  It is crudely analogous to a
gene as the cultural unit of selection.  Instead of memes trying to
replicate themselves in bodies as genes do, memes replicate themselves
in brains (Blackmore 37).  A catchy tune that is hard to get out of
one's head, that is a meme.  A chain letter that orders one to
replicate it for dubious rewards; it is a meme.  The ten commandments,
those are memes.  What is not a meme?  An experience is not a meme.
An idea that is never communicated is not a meme.  In the same way
that the Tree of Life fans out with variation and is trimmed by
natural selection, memes branch out with great variety, dying out
essentially when no minds or artifacts serve as their hosts.  This
tree of ideas, of memes, is the Tree of Knowledge not only of good and
evil but of all human knowledge.

## Conclusion

Genesis is an ancient story.  From the difficulty of child labor, to
facing death, its imagery does not lose its potency by marrying it
with science; indeed, it is enriched.  Genesis captures the
transcendent issues of morality and mortality.  It is a part of
humanity's heritage.  It was crafted by many hands during humanity's
cultural evolution.  It grew up with us, and we are challenged to
allow it to grow further still.  Genesis has the capacity to grow as
this essay has shown.  Much of the seminal events in Genesis have an
interpretation that unites the poetry of our past with the science of
our present.  In Genesis humans claimed the Tree of Knowledge, and the
creation of ideas, or memetic engineering, has been our domain while
the Tree of Life and its secrets have remained out of reach.  The
creation of new life, genetic engineering, is emerging however.  It
will doubtlessly change the way we live and die.  We may be on the
brink of entering an age where we cross back into the Garden of Eden,
move beyond the flaming sword, and claim the Tree of Life for
ourselves.

* * * 

# Works Cited

Blackmore, Susan.  <u>The Meme Machine.</u> Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.

Hooper, Joseph.  "The Prophet of Immortality: Controversial theorist Aubrey de Grey insists that we are within reach of an engineered cure for aging.  Are you prepared to live forever?"  Popular Science Jan. 2005. Examined 1 July 2008 [http://www.popsci.com/scitech/article/2005-01/prophet-immortality](http://www.popsci.com/scitech/article/2005-01/prophet-immortality)

<p><u>The Holy Bible: King James Version.</u>  Iowa Falls, IA: World Bible Publishers, 2001.</p>

Wright, Robert.  <u>The Moral Animal: Why We Are, the Way We Are: The New Science of Evolutionary Psychology.</u>  New York: Vintage Books, 1994.


